new(content): blog post for Falco 0.40.0 release (#1441)
falcosecurity/falco-website: content/en/blog/falco-0-40.0/index.md

Additionally, artifacts now use `jemalloc` as the allocator library. This should help mitigate some `memory fragmentation-related` issues.
Furthermore, Falco debug symbol files are now attached to GitHub releases. Falco is built in `RelWithDebInfo` mode, enabling users facing crashes to download debug symbols and attach them to their debugging sessions.

## Try it out

Interested in trying out the new features? Use the resources below to get started.

* [Container Images](/docs/getting-started/running/#docker)
    * `falco` ([DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/falcosecurity/falco), [AWS ECR Gallery](https://gallery.ecr.aws/falcosecurity/falco))
    * `falco-driver-loader` ([DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/falcosecurity/falco-driver-loader), [AWS ECR Gallery](https://gallery.ecr.aws/falcosecurity/falco-driver-loader))
* [CentOS/Amazon Linux](/docs/getting-started/installation/#centos-rhel)
* [Debian/Ubuntu](/docs/getting-started/installation/#debian)
* [openSUSE](/docs/getting-started/installation/#suse)
* [Linux binary package](/docs/getting-started/installation/#linux-binary)

## What’s next?

> Falco is more mature with each release. Following its [graduation](/blog/falco-graduation/) we have published the [roadmap](/docs/roadmap/#road-to-falco-1-0-0) for version 1.0.0 which is guiding us in the next steps. For the next release, you can expect more stability, streamlined container images, refinements to our rule syntax, new detections and plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Falco is more mature with each release. Following its [graduation](/blog/falco-graduation/) we have published the [roadmap](/docs/roadmap/#road-to-falco-1-0-0) for version 1.0.0 which is guiding us in the next steps. For the next release, you can expect more stability, a new container plugin, refinements to our deployment methods with a k8s operator, and as always new detections and fixes.
```

---
title: Introducing Falco 0.40.0
date: 2025-01-28
author: Aldo Lacuku, Federico Di Pierro
slug: falco-0-40-0
tags: ["Falco","Release"]
---

Dear Falco Community, today we are happy to announce the release of Falco 0.40.0!

This version brings several new features, performance improvements, and bug fixes that streamline Falco’s detection capabilities.

> During this release cycle, we merged more than 52 PRs on Falco and more than 150 PRs for libs and drivers, version 0.
> 20.0 and version 8.0.0 respectively. Thank you to our maintainers and contributors, as this would not happen without your support and dedication!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During this release cycle, we merged more than 52 PRs on Falco and more than 150 PRs for libs and drivers, version 0.20.0 and version 8.0.0 respectively. Thank you to our maintainers and contributors, as this would not happen without your support and dedication!
```

To learn all about these changes, read on!

## What’s new? TL;DR

*Key features:*

* [Streamlined Falco docker images](#streamlined-falco-docker-images);
* Falco static build has been reintroduced for `x86_64` binary using `musl`;
* New [process filters](#introducing-new-processs-filters) allow to filter events based on process metadata;
* Added support for `sendmmsg` and `recvmmsg` syscalls parameters;

> * [Plugins suggested output fields](#plugins-suggested-output-fields) are now available in the Falco engine [#3388](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pull/3388), [#2116](https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/pull/2116);

Author: No particulare reason, gonna remove them.

This release also comes with [breaking changes](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations-) that you should be aware of before upgrading.

## Major features and improvements

> The 0.40.0 release contains a number of feature and UX improvements, here are list of some of the key new capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The 0.40.0 release contains a number of features and UX improvements. Here is a list of some of the key new capabilities.
```

> ### Streamlined Falco docker images

Reviewer 2: @alacuku @FedeDP 

We also introduced a breaking change here. Now the main `falcosecurity/falco` image switched from a Debian base image to a distroless one. 

Furthermore, the `falcosecurity/falco-no-driver` is deprecated and the experimental `falcosecurity/falco-distroless` does not exist anymore, since it became the main image.

This is very relevant and should be advertised.

Author: Done!

Key improvements include:  

* Reduced Image Size: The new images are smaller, which reduces the time required to pull and deploy them.
* Optimized Layers: The layers in the Docker images have been optimized to improve build times and caching efficiency.
* Enhanced Security: The images have been hardened to enhance security, reducing potential vulnerabilities.

These changes make it easier to deploy and manage Falco in various environments

### Introducing new process filters

A new set of process filters are made available in this release: `proc.pgid, proc.pgid.name, proc.pgid.exe, proc.pgid.exepath, proc.is_pgid_leader`.
These filters enable users to filter events based on process metadata, such as the process name, executable path, and arguments. The new filters
introduce the `pgid` field, which is directly obtained from the kernel. This ID corresponds to the `host pid namespace`, aiding in the creation
of more reliable rules.

### Plugins suggested output fields

> The Falco engine now supports plugins that can suggest output fields. This feature allows plugins to provide additional context and information about an event, enhancing the visibility and understanding of the event.
> The suggested output fields are displayed in the Falco output, providing users with valuable insights into the event and its context. By leveraging this feature, Falco makes it easier for users to take advantage of the metadata provided by plugins
> and improve their security monitoring and incident response capabilities. New outputs fields are added only if the options is enabled and the plugins supports the new feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Falco engine now supports plugins that can suggest output fields. This feature allows plugins to provide additional context and information about an event, enhancing its visibility and understanding.
The suggested output fields are displayed in the Falco output, giving users valuable insights into the event and its context. By leveraging this feature, Falco makes it easier for users to take advantage of the metadata provided by plugins and improve their security monitoring and incident response capabilities. New output fields are added only if the option is enabled and the plugin supports this new feature.
```

Keep an eye on the existing plugins to be updated to support the new feature.

## Breaking changes and deprecations ⚠️
This version comes with breaking changes, mostly in the configuration interface.

### Removed command line options and equivalent configuration options

We removed the already deprecated options  `--cri`, `--disable-cri-async`, and is now possible to achieve the same result through the [Falco configuration](https://falco.org/docs/rules/controlling-rules/#via-falco-configuration-or-parameters).
A new configuration options has been introduced to enable and configure the supported container engines in Falco:
```yaml
container_engines:
  docker:
    enabled: true
  cri:
    enabled: true
    sockets: ["/run/containerd/containerd.sock", "/run/crio/crio.sock", "/run/k3s/containerd/containerd.sock"]
    disable_async: false
  podman:
    enabled: true
  lxc:
    enabled: true
  libvirt_lxc:
    enabled: true
  bpm:
    enabled: true
```
Please keep in mind that the new configuration options are tagged as `incubating` and may change in the future.

> You con still use the `-o` command line option:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also use the `-o` command line option:
```

> You con still use the `-o` command line option:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can still use the `-o` command line option:
```

> * --cri <socket_path>: use `-o container_engines.cri.enabled=true, -o container_engines.cri.sockets[]=<socket_path, -o container_engines.cri.disable_async=true` instead to enable the CRI runtime and configure the socket path and disable the async mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `--cri <socket_path>`: use `-o container_engines.cri.enabled=true, -o container_engines.cri.sockets[]=<socket_path, -o container_engines.cri.disable_async=true` instead to enable the CRI runtime and configure the socket path and disable the async mode.
```

You can find more information on breaking changes in the [tracking issue](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/issues/3226).

### Deprecations

In Falco 0.40.0, we have deprecated the following options:
* `-S / --snaplen` cli flag has been deprecated in favor of the `falco_libs.snaplen` configuration option;
* `-A` cli flag has been deprecated in favor of the `base_syscalls.all` configuration option;
* `-b` cli flag has been deprecated in favor of the `buffer_format_base64` configuration option;

> ## Worthy of note:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Worthy of note
```

Reviewer 4: A graph with the diff of speed could be nice to have there.

Reviewer: We have this one:
![Benchmark EPS sleep 310ns](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5aa11916-8e59-4a96-a90e-2573f172a6b8)  and this one 
![Google Benchmarks 50 reps](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c81d5175-760b-4d59-8da3-94585ed7d67d)
cc @alacuku

Additionally, artifacts now use `jemalloc` as the allocator library. This should help mitigate some `memory fragmentation-related` issues.
Furthermore, Falco debug symbol files are now attached to GitHub releases. Falco is built in `RelWithDebInfo` mode, enabling users facing crashes to download debug symbols and attach them to their debugging sessions.

## Try it out

Interested in trying out the new features? Use the resources below to get started.

* [Container Images](/docs/getting-started/running/#docker)
    * `falco` ([DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/falcosecurity/falco), [AWS ECR Gallery](https://gallery.ecr.aws/falcosecurity/falco))
    * `falco-driver-loader` ([DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/falcosecurity/falco-driver-loader), [AWS ECR Gallery](https://gallery.ecr.aws/falcosecurity/falco-driver-loader))
* [CentOS/Amazon Linux](/docs/getting-started/installation/#centos-rhel)
* [Debian/Ubuntu](/docs/getting-started/installation/#debian)
* [openSUSE](/docs/getting-started/installation/#suse)
* [Linux binary package](/docs/getting-started/installation/#linux-binary)

## What’s next?

> Falco is more mature with each release. Following its [graduation](/blog/falco-graduation/) we have published the
> [roadmap](/docs/roadmap/#road-to-falco-1-0-0) for version 1.0.0 which is guiding us in the next steps. For the next
> release, you can expect more stability, streamlined container images, refinements to our rule syntax, new detections
> and plugins.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Falco is more mature with each release. Following its [graduation](/blog/falco-graduation/) we have published the [roadmap](/docs/roadmap/#road-to-falco-1-0-0) for version 1.0.0 which is guiding us in the next steps. For the next release, you can expect more stability, streamlined container images, refinements to our rule syntax, new detections and plugins.
```
